---
title: The Sine
layout: post
description: All you need is a disco stick, iPod glasses, a looking ball, and a sine from above
category: Music
---

I have been a long time <dfn>Little Monster</dfn>, which is what Lady Gaga's fans call themselves. Little Monsters have had a really strong connection to Lady Gaga. And while you might think that we all look the same, wearing the same crazy costumes like Gaga, it is quite to the contrary. Lady Gaga's career is dedicated not to create fans that look like clones of her, but rather people who are unapologetically themselves, ones who will fight to the death for their freedom to be themselves.

Lady Gaga's rise to fame started in 2008 with the release of her debut single <i>Just Dance</i>. The lyrics of that song would be what people call <q>basic</q>. However, the sound was so fresh at the time that it topped the chart, albeit it took several months. That time, people looked at her like she was just another pop star with a gimmick to catch everyone's attention. But soon enough, the world realized how big of an impact she would make.

## A cultural reset

Upon Gaga's arrival, pop culture was reset. Because of her crazy looks and the new sound she has reintroduced into the pop music scene, her contemporaries were forced to up their game. As a result, pop music in general was changed.

If any person from the general public were to be asked what makes Lady Gaga an iconic artist, they would most probably say that it's her clothes and costumes. Gaga has been really successful in incorporating glamorous regalia into her music. Most people might have felt she was overdoing things, or that she was a fashion disaster, but like she said, <q>They don't know anything about fashion.</q> Whether she was a fashion icon or a gimmicky disaster is a subjective discussion. But there's no denying the fact that her tactics impacted artists like Katy Perry, Rihanna, and Jessie J. 

Lady Gaga's iconic looks have been cemented in pop culture history. Her first iconic look is the hooded leotard that she wore in her performances, along with the iPod glasses and the now iconic disco stick[^1]. During the transition from her debut album <i>The Fame</i> to her follow-up EP <i>The Fame Monster</i>, her looks where characteristically darker in theme, alluding to the <i>monsters</i> she wrote about in the EP. One particular look that stands out is Gaga's outrageously high heels. 

And no one was prepared for her most iconic look: the meat dress as it is now called. For the 2010 VMAs, she wore a few different looks as she accepted several wins for her single <i>Bad Romance</i>. But one that stood out is the dress she wore that is made of raw meat as she accepted her win for Video of the Year for <i>Bad Romance</i>. This iconic pop history event has spawned several documentaries and countless essays and fan video analysis online.

Lady Gaga has an outstanding vocal talent and mindblowing writing skills. But music is a multi-million-dollar business, and to stay on top, talent is not enough. It could be argued that Lady Gaga is just a brilliant marketing strategist. Only she can look schizophrenic and at the same time make it look cool and smart. And she singlehandedly reset pop culture&mdash;she made fashion and art accessible to the general public that they ate it up so much other pop artists were forced to be just like her and change and transform from one album cycle to another. Art is enough as it is, but in a business, art is worthless regardless of its impact if it cannot generate revenue. And that is what Gaga did very well.

## When the applause were silent

Historically speaking, Lady Gaga's cultural impact is really saturated. She did all of these in just a span of ten years. And throughout her career, she was only on the very forefront of pop music revolution for three or four years before she was relatively pushed aside. Her fourth studio album <i>ARTPOP</i>, although still successful in its own regard, was underwhelming compared to her previous three albums <i>The Fame</i>, <i>The Fame Monster</i>, and <i>Born This Way</i>. These led to her fading from the limelight and pursuing jazz music to find her passion once more.

And even in the years when she was <i>away</i>, Lady Gaga's intelligent storytelling and mind-boggling discernment for the sociology of fame is still evident. Going back to her final single from <i>The Fame</i>, <i>Paparazzi</i>, she has talked about a pop star's rise to fame and her downfall. This has also been portrayed in the music video. Her chilling performance at the 2009 VMAs, although overshadowed by Kanye West interrupting Taylor Swift's acceptance speech, was without a doubt another remarkable event in pop culture history. In that performance, she has portrayed what she calls <q>the decay of the blonde pop star,</q> a chilling yet dramatic downfall of a pop superstar. This is a perfect way to end the album cycle for <i>The Fame</i>, which tackled the glamour of being famous, and to transition into her EP, <i>The Fame Monster</i>, which is a commentary on the negative effects of fame.

> Isn't that what people want, to see how people who have it all lose it all?
> <cite>Lady Gaga in her interview with 60 Minutes</cite>

This almost feels like a self-fulfilling prophecy, but Lady Gaga's career has followed the same trajectory as the careers of the stars she commented on like Princess Diana, Marilyn Monroe, Judy Garland, Jon Benet Ramsey, Liberace, and Jesus Christ himself&mdash;all of which suffered untimely deaths at the height of their superstardom. Although Gaga didn't die, she almost did. In a recent interview for her sixth studio album <i>Chromatica</i>, Lady Gaga admitted to having suicidal tendencies. Needless to say, Lady Gaga is smart enough to have a deep understanding of how fame works, but even her didn't escape the claws of the fame monster itself.

Lady Gaga suffered severe body pains during her <i>Born This Way Ball</i> tour. It was prematurely ended after she suffered from a labral tear that required her to undergo surgery. Her success was abruptly paused, and for a moment, she disappeared from the spotlight. During her recovery, she prepared for the release of her fourth studio album <i>ARTPOP</i>, which she sarcastically said would be the album of the millenium. It has morphed in terms of its concept throughout the time she was writing it, but ultimately it became an album that experiments about the dream of high-brow art and pop culture coming together, something that she has done right from the start of her career.

<i>ARTPOP</i> had such high hopes. It spawned numerous attempts to bring high-brow art like the <i>Birth of Venus</i> by Sandro Botticelli into the mainstream pop culture. It attempted to make Lady Gaga the first ever pop star to perform in space with its partnership with NASA. It attempted to put out an app that would have enabled her to release new tracks from the record's infamous yet non-existent second act. However, all of these failed to come into fruition.

Arguably, <i>ARTPOP</i>'s underwhelming chart performance and its unaccomplished goals are arguably not Lady Gaga's fault. It just came during a time in her life when people she trusted the most betrayed her.[^2] But regardless of who's fault it was, Lady Gaga's demise is exactly just as expected of superstars: it was a dramatic downfall.

*[EP]: Extended Play
*[VMAs]: Video Music Awards
*[NASA]: National Aeronautics and Space Agency


[^1]: Lady Gaga always lugged her disco stick around during the album cycle for her debut album <i>The Fame</i>. She also referenced this in her single <i>Lovegame</i>. When asked in an interview what the disco stick represented, she responded <q>it's a penis</q>.

[^2]: Lady Gaga severed ties with her former manager, Troy Carter, after he reportedly neglected her when he couldn't profit off of her any longer after her hip injury and the failure of Applause to reach the top of the charts.